First draft for port forwarding and ssh keys (#2000)
rcgsheffield/sheffield_hpc: stanage/software/apps/jupyter.rst

.. _jupyter_stanage:

.. |softwarename| replace:: Jupyter Notebook

|softwarename|
==============

.. sidebar:: |softwarename|

   :URL: https://posit.co/products/open-source/rstudio/
   :Documentation: https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io/en/5.6.0/index.html

Jupyter Notebook is an open source web application that you can use to create and share documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations, and text. 

Installing and Running Jupyter Notebooks
========================================

> The HPC clusters are only able to host a jupyter notebook work space in an interactve session. To install and run Jupyter please follow these steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HPC clusters are only able to host a jupyter notebook work space in an interactive session. To install and run Jupyter please follow these steps.
```

1. start an interactive session  with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    srun --pty bash -i

> 2. Create  an :ref:`anconda <python_stanage>` environment. (If you already have an existing environment, jump to step 3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create  an :ref:`anaconda <python_stanage>` environment. (If you already have an existing environment skip to step 3)
```

> 3. Activate an anaconda environment ( This can be an existing one or the one you created in step 2. )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Activate an Anaconda environment (This can be an existing one or the one you created in step 2).
```

> 4. Install Jupyter using ``pip``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Install Jupyter using ``pip`` :
```

.. code-block:: bash
    
    pip install jupyter

> 5. If it's your first time using Jupyter, you will need to create a notebook configuration file. The following command will create ``jupyter_notebook_config.py`` in your home folder ``~/.jupyter/jupyter_notebook_config.py``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If it's your first time using Jupyter, you will need to create a notebook configuration file. The following command will create ``jupyter_notebook_config.py`` in your home directory ``~/.jupyter/jupyter_notebook_config.py``.
```

.. code-block:: bash
    
    jupyter notebook --generate-config

> 6. Set up a password for your Jupyter notebook (This is only done once). To do this, use the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Set up a password for your Jupyter notebook (this only needs doing once), with the following command:
```

.. code-block:: bash
    
    jupyter notebook password

> 7. Now you are ready to start jupyter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Now you are ready to start Jupyter:
```

.. code-block:: bash
    
    jupyter notebook 

> The above command will produce output similar to the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will produce output similar to the following:
```

.. code-block:: bash
    
    ...
    ...    
    [I 2024-02-28 14:58:45.046 ServerApp] Jupyter Server 2.12.5 is running at:
    [I 2024-02-28 14:58:45.046 ServerApp] http://localhost:8889/tree
    [I 2024-02-28 14:58:45.046 ServerApp]     http://127.0.0.1:8889/tree
    ...
    ...

> 

Reviewer: need to add note callout to take not of the http://127.0.0.1:8889/tree address

Author: added a note

> Accessing Jupyter On A Web Browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessing Jupyter with a Web Browser
```

==================================

> Once you have completed the above steps, you are ready to access jupyter on a web browser. There are two ways to do this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have completed the above steps, you are ready to access Jupyter with a web browser. There are two ways to do this:
```

#. Using flight-desktop (Recommended)
#. Using Tunneling/port forwading (Advanced users)

Using flight-desktop
====================

1. Start a :ref:`flight <flight-desktop>`  desktop session.
2. Click on the web browser icon 

> .. image:: /images/flight_desktop_session.png

Reviewer: Suggest smaller image, maybe just the icon selection

Author: smaller image added

3. Once the web browser is up and running, use the web adress with ``127.0.0.1`` from step 7  of the ``Installing and Running Jupyter Notebooks`` section. In our example, this would be 

.. code-block:: bash
    
    http://127.0.0.1:8889/tree

Using Tunneling/Port Forwading
==============================

This is mostly recommended for advanced users.

1. You must have `ssh keys<ssh_keys>` in place to use this method.
2. Open a new terminal  and enter the following command. (Please note , without SSH keys, this step will fail)

.. code-block:: bash

    ssh -J $YourUsername@stanage.sheffield.ac.uk -L 8888:127.0.0.1:8888 $YourUsername@<IP Address>

> Please note the above command is heavily dependant on the node you launched  jupyter notebook.

Reviewer: Suggest adding a note callout:
Replace<IP Address> with.....

Author: added a note

+------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| Interactive Node                                     | IP Address                                           |
+======================================================+======================================================+
| node001                                              | 10.10.1.1                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| node002                                              | 10.10.1.2                                            |
+------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+

> For example step 7  of the ``Installing and Running Jupyter Notebooks`` section was launched in worker nodeoo2, the command would be :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if we launched Jupyter on interactive node002 then the command would be :
```

Author: updated this in a note

.. code-block:: bash

    ssh -J $YourUsername@stanage.sheffield.ac.uk -L 8888:127.0.0.1:8888 $YourUsername@10.10.1.2

> 3. Once step 2 has run and succesful, you just need to open a browser (Chrome/Edge/Mozilla etc) on your machine and enter the address containing  ``localhost`` from step 7  of the ``Installing and Running Jupyter Notebooks`` section. In our example this would be 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open a browser (Chrome/Edge/Mozilla etc) on your machine and enter the address we noted earlier containing  ``localhost``  
```

.. _jupyter_stanage:

.. |softwarename| replace:: Jupyter Notebook

|softwarename|
==============

.. sidebar:: |softwarename|

   :URL: https://posit.co/products/open-source/rstudio/
   :Documentation: https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io/en/5.6.0/index.html

Jupyter Notebook is an open source web application that you can use to create and share documents that contain live code, equations, visualisations, and text. 

Installing and Running Jupyter Notebooks
-----------------------------------------

The HPC clusters are only able to host a Jupyter notebook work space in an interactive session. To install and run Jupyter please follow these steps.

1. Start an interactive session  with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    srun --pty bash -i

2. Create  an :ref:`anaconda <python_stanage>` environment. (If you already have an existing environment skip to step 3)

> 

Reviewer 2: @nikishe It would be worth mentioning before this step to `module load Anaconda3` to avoid any confusion of thinking they need to install anaconda/miniconda.

Author: I have altered the sentence to show the module load and environment creation. I did not add the code though as the hyper link deals with all these

Accessing Jupyter with a Web Browser
-------------------------------------

Once you have completed the above steps, you are ready to access Jupyter with a web browser. There are two ways to do this:

#. Using flight-desktop (Recommended)
#. Using Tunneling/port forwarding (Advanced users)

Using flight-desktop
--------------------

1. Start a :ref:`flight <flight-desktop>`  desktop session.
2. Click on the web browser icon 

.. image:: /images/browser_button.PNG

3. Once the web browser is up and running, use the web address with ``127.0.0.1`` that we noted earlier. In our example, this would be 

.. code-block:: bash
    
    http://127.0.0.1:8889/tree

Using Tunneling/Port Forwarding
--------------------------------

This is mostly recommended for advanced users.

1. You must have :ref:`ssh keys<ssh_keys>` in place to use this method.
2. Open a new terminal  and enter the following command. (Please note , without SSH keys, this step will fail)

.. code-block:: bash

    ssh -J $YourUsername@stanage.sheffield.ac.uk -L 8888:127.0.0.1:8888 $YourUsername@<IP Address>

> 

Reviewer 2: @nikishe I can only successfully execute this (Windows 11 OS) in Powershell/cmd prompt, and not in my bash terminal.

.. note:: 

>     The above command is heavily dependant on the node you launched  Jupyter notebook. S

Reviewer 2: @nikishe Typo "S" after "Jupyter notebook."

Author: corrected
